---
title: "ME330 - Engineering Materials - Lab"
collection: teaching
type: "Undergraduate course"
permalink: /teaching/2022-2025-teaching-1
venue: "University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, Mechanical Science and Engineering Department"
---
Lab Portion
======

During a semester, 10 labs are taught utilizing the [MTIL](https://mtil.illinois.edu) lab space. These labs give an introduction to basic material properties and testing performed in a professional setting, with the focus on student-led efforts. After the lab, students are expected to write a lab report in a specified format, which includes formal reports, presentations, and letter reports. These include individual and group reports when applicable. Reports are due by the next lab, which tends to make reports a weekly assignment. Grading is performed within two weeks of the report due date using a descriptive rubric that students have access to. An oral examination during group presentations is also performed to give students insight into better practices for public speaking on engineering topics.    

Brief Descriptions of the Labs
======
- **Lab 0 - Introductory Data Analysis**: Students are given sets of hardness, stress, and strain data where they must interpret the material properties and perform a statistical analysis. 
  These are then submitted in properly formatted graphs and tables to show the ability to present data in meaningful ways.
- **Lab 1 - Hardness and Compression Testing**: An introductory lab for learning about different hardness measurements performed on materials and how to use a universal testing machine. Four student groups perform four separate compression tests on two steel alloys, an aluminum alloy, and PMMA. During this time, student groups are also performing Rockwell B and C and Brinell hardness measurements on 4340 steel and an aluminum alloy to understand the limitations of each hardness measurement's range.
- **Lab 2 - Tension Testing**: Tensile tests are performed in parallel between student groups of a steel under two heat treatments and an aluminum with different alloying content to analyze the differences these actions have on the overall constitutive response of the material. Student groups then test individually 304 stainless steel and PMMA to see more rigorous examples of a high ductility and brittle material, respectively. The lab finishes with a final presentation of C36000 brass undergoing reversal tests, in which the concept of strain is defined as an additive decomposition of the ductile and plastic strains.
- **Lab 3 - Cold Work and Annealing**: A C36000 brass wedge undergoes a strip rolling process to a constant thickness in which a cold work gradient can be measured across the entire wedge. Students perform hardness measurements on this wedge at specified locations to determine the change in material properties. One set of wedges undergoes an annealing process in which students measure the change of hardness at the previously mentioned locations. A microscope talk is also done during the lab, where a visual inspection of the cold working and annealing microstructure is shown to students.    
- **Lab 4 - Phase Diagrams and Casting**: Inflection points for multiple tin-bismuth alloys are measured using a thermocouple. During the cooling process, a microstructure and theory talk are given to students to learn the rise of phase diagrams and how the cooling curves reflect this phenomenon. The other portion of the lab includes a brief introduction to casting processes using video aids and an inspection of numerous casting microstructures.  
- **Lab 5 - Heat Treatment of Steels**: Students perform heat treatments on 4340 steel samples at the beginning of the lab period and later on test the tensile properties of said samples. The heat treatments include annealing, normalizing, water and oil quenching, and tempering. A microstructure talk is also given on the phase diagram of steels and the time dependency that arises during quenching to form martensite.
- **Lab 6 - Hardenability of Steels**: A Jominy end-quench test is performed on 1045, 4340, and 6150 steels. Students then grind a flat surface of the side of the bars and take hardness measurements along the bar's length to determine the martensite formation along a temperature gradient. A similar microstructure is given from the pervious lab with more focus on the effect alloying has on TTT diagrams.
- **Lab 7 - Fracture Mechanics and Impact**: Students watch an ASTM K1 fracture test to validate the form of Griffith's fracture theory. The other portion of the lab is Charpy and plate impact testing on metals and polymers, respectively. Students perform tests at three different temperatures of 0C, room temperature, and 100C.
- **Lab 8 - Welding and Allied Processes**: Tensile tests are performed on aluminum and steel alloys that were welded using chamfer, butt, and low powered butt welds. A microstructure talk is then given after testing to understand fracture location, and the similarities welding has with casting. Group oral presentations are also given during the lab on either the fracture toughness or impact testing results from lab 7.
- **Lab 9 - Polymer and Composite Tensile Testing**: Tensile tests are performed on GPO-3 and G10 at different orientations on the composites to determine anisotropy. Fracture behavior is also examined to determine when fiber, matrix, or adhesive failure dominates the failure. Multiple strain rate tests are then performed on PMMA and HDPE to rationalize how strain rate affects the tensile response of the polymer.
- **Lab 10 - Corrosion**: An electrochemical cell is made using different metal strips as the cathode and anode of the cell. Voltages can currents are then measured between the two metal strips with tap water and salt water to measure the increase in the corrosion process of the metals. Similar to lab 8, group oral presentations are given on either the composite or polymer data.   
